---
layout: page
title: About me
subtitle: Jacob Richey, Data Science Student at UPenn
---

Hi there, my name is Jacob! I grew up in Seattle, Washington, and now find myself across the country in my senior year at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. I'm studying Economics (in *The College of Arts and Sciences*), with a focus on Econometrics, and minoring in Data Science (*Penn Engineering*) and Statistics (*The Wharton School*). Classes I'm particularly excited for this fall include Modern Regression (STAT 474), Big Data Analytics (CIS 545), the Culture of Technology (MGMT 265), and Urban Education (URBS 202). 

I came into college with a passion for quantitative analysis across many disciplines, and found my interests in statistics, computer science, and strategic thinking converge within the broad field data science. I don't yet know what industry I'd like to work in, the growing list includes tech, clean energy, music, and sports, but I'm optimistic and inspired by this flexibility. My love for baseball has led me to perform several sports analytics research projects over the previous few years, the most notable being the [playerElo](https://jacobrichey.github.io/2019-09-10-playerElo-2019/) model. The Elo rating system, created by physics professor Arpad Elo in the mid-twentieth century to rank chess players, is adapted to represent individual players in the MLB, enabling quality of competition dependent player analysis. The paper was a finalist in the 2019 CMU Reproducible Research Competition, and I enjoyed the opportunity to present at the Carnegie Mellon Sports Analytics Conference. Here's a [picture](https://twitter.com/CMU_Stats/status/1191118563106361347?s=20) of me looking quite excited. 

I really enjoy learning from the statistics community on Twitter, and I'd encourage you to check out my own [Twitter](https://twitter.com/Richey_Jacob) feed, where I post shorter projects without full write-ups, such as a [mathematical look at the Houston Astros sign stealing](https://twitter.com/Richey_Jacob/status/1262454513283166208), [galaxy-like visualizations of my sleep quality](https://twitter.com/Richey_Jacob/status/1196596855100104704), and a [comparison of crime density in San Francisco and Los Angeles from 2010-Present](https://twitter.com/Richey_Jacob/status/1189950161566330880). I also occasionally share quotes I like. My most recent favorite I came across in Joel Grus' data science textbook: From Alexander Pope, "A little learning is a dangerous thing; Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring." Excellent.

This past quarantined summer, I originally planned to work for the New York Mets in player development at their spring training site in Florida. Faced instead with an unexpectadly large amount of free time on my hands, I committed myself to a summer of learning. I used my strong background in R to become proficient in complementary, data-oriented languages such as Python and SQL, while letting my love for food and nutrition science to fuel a newfound passion for cooking.  

I'm excited to graduate in the spring and see what new adventures life brings! Feel free to contact me through any of the methods listed at the footer of this webpage.
